.. _syntax:

Syntax
======

For any of the directives to work, the C/C++ source code must be documented
using specific documentation comment style, and the comments must follow
reStructuredText markup.

Optionally, there's limited support for some Javadoc_ and Doxygen_ style
constructs for compatibility.

See :ref:`the examples section <examples>` for a quick tour of what's possible,
and read on for documentation comment formatting details.

Documentation Comments
----------------------

Documentation comments are C/C++ language block comments that begin with
``/**``.

Because reStructuredText is sensitive about indentation, it's strongly
recommended, even if not strictly required, to follow a uniform style for
multi-line comments. Place the opening delimiter ``/**`` and closing delimiter
``␣*/`` on lines of their own, and prefix the lines in between with ``␣*␣``.
Indent the actual documentation at the third column, to let Hawkmoth
consistently remove the enclosing comment markers:

.. code-block:: c

  /**
   * The quick brown fox jumps
   * over the lazy dog.
   */

One-line comments are fine too:

.. code-block:: c

   /** The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog. */

All documentation comments preceding C/C++ constructs are attached to them, and
result in C/C++ Domain directives being added for them. This includes macros,
functions, struct and union members, enumerations, etc.

Documentation comments followed by comments (documentation or not) are included
as normal paragraphs in the order they appear.

Tags
----

Use reStructuredText `field lists`_ for documenting function parameters, return
values, and arbitrary other data:

.. code-block:: c

  /**
   * The baznicator.
   *
   * :param foo: The Foo parameter.
   * :param bar: The Bar parameter.
   * :return: 0 on success, non-zero error code on error.
   * :since: v0.1
   */
  int baz(int foo, int bar);

.. _field lists: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#field-lists

Compatibility
-------------

Hawkmoth supports limited Javadoc_ and Doxygen_ style constructs for
compatibility. See the :ref:`extension documentation <extension>` on how to
enable the support.

.. code-block:: c

  /**
   * The baznicator.
   *
   * @param foo The Foo parameter.
   * @param bar The Bar parameter.
   * @return 0 on success, non-zero error code on error.
   * @since v0.1
   */
  int baz(int foo, int bar);

.. warning:: The compatibility support and its documentation are a
             work-in-progress.

.. _Javadoc: https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/documentation/javadoc-137458.html

.. _Doxygen: http://doxygen.nl/

Cross-Referencing C/C++ Constructs
----------------------------------

Use :any:`sphinx:c-domain` or :any:`sphinx:cpp-domain` roles for
cross-referencing as follows:

- ``:c:var:`name``` for variables.

- ``:c:func:`name``` for functions and function-like macros.

- ``:c:macro:`name``` for simple macros and enumeration constants.

- ``:c:type:`name``` for structs, unions, enums, and typedefs.

- ``:c:member:`name.membername``` for struct and union members.

See the Sphinx :any:`sphinx:basic-domain-markup` and generic
:any:`sphinx:xref-syntax` for further details on cross-referencing, and how to
specify the default domain for brevity.
